Galvanization of Protein-Protein Interactions in a Dynamic Zinc 
Interactome



<chap:Galvanization-of-Protein-Protein>

Anna Kocyła, Józef Ba Tran and Artur Krężel
Department of Chemical Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology 
University of Wrocław, F. Joliot-Curie 14a, 50-383 Wrocław, 
Poland

Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2021 46(1), 64–79.



1.1 Brief history and bibliometric data

Something

1.2 Summary

The functions that are performed by macromolecules in the cell 
are dependent on the interaction with their partners. What is the 
partner of the interaction depends on the role of the 
macromolecule. In the case of glucose-6-phosphate isomerase the 
one of the interaction partners for the enzyme is glucose 
6-phosphate, which is interconverted into fructose-6-phosphate. [Berg2007]
 Other proteins can interact with lipids, nucleic acid and other 
proteins. The holistic knowledge  about the these interactions is 
used to plot the map of the interactions, which in turn can 
identify the functions of the proteins and their interdependence 
leading to understanding the cellular function. [Cafarelli2017] 
From this network of interactions,  are crucial to gain 
comprehension about the functional relationships between 
proteins. Over the last decades, the development of  methods e.g. 
peptide phage display [Sundell2014], yeast surface display [Boder1997]
, yeast-two-hybrid system [Fields1989] and others lead to heaping 
amount of data. Together with huge amount of data a large number 
of databases have been founded to curate and annotate the . [Patil2018]
 

However, none of the vast interaction networks presents full 
landscape, as interactions induced by small ligands as well as 
caused by metal ions may be missing from the picture. Taking into 
account that bioinformatic analyses estimate that in human  every 
tenth protein is a zinc-binding protein [Andreini2009, Bertini2010]
, and the fact that most of the  methods do not even consider the 
presence of another actors (i.e. Zn(II)) in the interaction, thus 
causing such interactions to be overlooked, makes at least 10% 
interactions not fully resolved. Though metal ions, compared to 
macromolecules, are small, compared both, mass and dimensions, 
they have a significant impact on the structure of the protein 
implying the consequences for the stability and function of 
protein, and protein complexes. Though the impact of the of 
various metal ions on the living organisms have been studied for 
a while, and the effects of deficit or surplus of some 
microelements are known, the mechanism of action of those 
elements may be still vague. As have been described in [ch:Zn(II) binding sites]
 Zn(II) can be found in various architectures. The studies how 
the architecture translates into function led to identification 
of catalytic nad structural zinc-binding sites, however the fact 
that Zn(II) can in be located on the  is often overlooked. 

Our goal in this meta-analysis was to provide a comprehensive 
description of . We wanted to underline that the presence of 
Zn(II) at protein-protein  plays a role in orchestrating the 
complex stability, adds additional level of the protein complex 
regulation, and despite the fact that it seems to be quite a rare 
phenomenon the presence of Zn(II) is crucial for fulfilling 
several essential for the organism physiological functions. As a 
showcase example / Zn(II)–protein complex, essential component of 
the circadian clock, can be evoked, where interdependent Zn(II) 
complexation and disulfide bond formation modulates the complex. [Schmalen2014]
 Our review article, attached bellow presents more fascinating  
examples where Zn(II) is essential for proper functioning of the 
protein complexes.

The description of outstanding  examples is only one part of our 
review, the formation of  is governed by the same thermodynamic 
and chemical principles as regular protein-protein complexes, 
however the involvement of Zn(II) in the complexation makes the 
formation of complex dependent on 










